---
layout: millennium_corals
title: Geomorphology
---

## Reef Types

This overview of the main reef formations is not exhaustive. This page presents briefly the notion of seascape and the main classical geomorphological reef-types (atoll, bank, fringing, barrier, patch). There are many variations and other geomorphological sub-classes that we identify and map using images.

One of the challenges of this project is that the global reef classification scheme we are building will be derived from modern, horizontal structures as seen from space. But to be accepted by the scientific community, the typology needs also reflect the geological history of the reefs and be in agreement with decades and centuries of habits, at least since Charles Darwin's work.

Reef geomorphology is not "linear". Reef types do not necessarily fit into the traditional Darwinian fringing-barrier-atoll sequence. The geological history controls the modern geomorphology of many reefs. Pre-Holocene topography provides the foundation where reef-building organisms have flourished and grown in a vertical or horizontal mode according to the variations of sea-levels. Then, within a region, antecedent reef topography, modern reef growth and erosion, tectonic events, eustatic variations, oceanic hydroclimate and rainfall patterns have modulated the geomorphology we can observe now from space.

## Atolls & Banks

### Atolls

Atolls occur throughout all the oceans. Atoll comes from a very specific administrative Maldivian term that has been inadequately used in a geomorphology context to designate Pacific Ocean annular-shaped reef structures, either entirely closed by a rim such as Taka and Utrik (#9) (Marshall) or very open to the ocean, such as Beautemps-Beaupré #10 or Ouvéa #11 in Loyalty Islands (New-Caledonia) who presents a fragmented rim (#30). A true atoll is North Mahe (#6), a Maldivian administrative entity with numerous rim and lagoon faros (Maldives #36). Faros are reefs with a central enclosed lagoon or depression. Actually, morphologically speaking, most atolls worldwide should have been called faros, or oceanic faros. Indeed, modern atoll present a faro-like annular-shaped ring with a central lagoon such as Rahsdoo Atoll (#7) (Maldives) or Fabre Atoll (#12) (New-Caledonia). The formation of faros is still a matter of discussion, but certainly, the processes that created faros in Maldives are different to the processes that created "atolls" worldwide, thus designating "atoll" as faro would be inappropriate.

### Banks

Related to atolls, banks also occur throughout all the oceans. The definition of a bank is also problematic. The word "Bank" has been used to name platforms that show a very large diversity of morphology and structures, from extremely wide carbonate systems (#4 Great Bahamas Bank, #25 Lee Stocking Island, Bahamas), to narrow oceanic reefs (#19 Les Glorieuses, France, Indian Ocean) and to atolls (#14 Chinchorro Bank). Intuitively, banks should be almost entirely submerged when compared to atolls and other oceanic reefs. Reef formations were frequently named "banks" to refer principally to an area of shallow water. Lack of early clear geomorphological references and different administration likely explain the lack of consistency and homogenization. This is why Chinchorro Bank (#14) (Mexico) is called a bank while the structurally similar Lighthouse Atoll (#15) (Belize) is an atoll.

Some suggest using the presence/absence of emergent volcanic rock as supplementary criteria to classify oceanic reef formations. For instance, the superficial visible part of an atoll should be only carbonate structures. But Clipperton Atoll presents remnants of volcanic structures along its rim. North Hawaiian Islands include banks, atolls, reefs, reef-top islands and basaltic islands. Almost every reef formation of this archipelago is a specific case. North Western Hawaiian Islands (#18 Pear and Hermes Atoll) share many morphological features with other formations worldwide (#13 Alacranes Reef, Mexico) like lagoonal reticulated reefs.

In the relatively small Caribbean Seas (compared to the Pacific Ocean for instance), the diversity of atolls and banks is high. Mexico, Belize, Nicaragua, Venezuela and Colombia have significant coral surface areas on remote shallow oceanic reef formations. Alacranes #13 (Mexico) is rich in reticulated reefs, Lighthouse Atoll #15 (Belize) and Chinchorro Bank #14 (Mexico) share a similar structure, with a narrow lagoon. Glovers Atoll #16 (Belize) has a structure similar to many closed Pacific Ocean atolls with numerous small lagoonal patches. Los Roques Archipelago #17 (Venezuela) is a platform fragmented in numerous outer reefs surrounding the larger atoll-like formation. Most of these isolated "atolls" and "banks" are asymmetrical, revealing differential growth and erosion under different exposure to the past and present hydroclimate (swell, wind, rainfall, river plume dispersal).

Most of the modern area of these "atolls" and banks are sedimentary domain, seagrass-rich back-reef and lagoons. Modern coral dominated areas are actually very marginal on most of the images that we show here, though they can be accurately delineated. On some large banks, coral areas along the outer slopes represent an infinitesimal component in regards to the sediment and seagrass surface areas (#4 Great Bahamas Bank, #25 Lee Stocking Island, Bahamas).

## Fringing Reefs

Fringing reefs are those that grow along continental land or an island. They represent a very large proportion of reefs worldwide, in every region: Caribbean (#20 Cayman Islands, #3 San Blas, Panama), Indo-Pacific (#21 New Caledonia), Pacific (#37 Mangaia, Cook Island) Indian Ocean (#22 Ningaloo Reef, Australia, #23 North Madagascar), South East Asia (#24 Sabah, Malaysia) and the Red Sea. When the fringing reef system is very narrow (#20 Cayman Islands), the images reveal only the basic structure, shape and extent of the reefs. The narrow visible part is prolonged by steep walls and slopes that harbor a very high diversity of reef organisms, but this can not be seen directly using the images.

## Barrier Reefs

Barrier reefs traditionally refer to fringing systems that have been separated from the land because of two processes: lateral growth and subsidence of the land. An island bordered by fringing reefs that eventually evolve to a barrier reef system is exemplified by Mangaia (#37) and Aitutaki (#37), Cook Island. The land is still emergent in the lagoon in Aitutaki, while an atoll would be without any central land. Sometimes, islands where the land occupies a small fraction of the lagoon are called pseudo-atoll.

The rim of a Tuamotu, Cook or Marshall atoll can be considered the final stage of a barrier reef. However, the rim of Maldivian atoll would not be a barrier reef because the biological, geological, tectonic and eustatic processes that created the atolls are different on this region than in Tuamotu or Marshall. However, considering their modern geomorphology and their benthic zones, there is no real justification to not consider Maldivian reef rims barrier reef systems. On the other hand, some reefs sometimes presented as barrier reef (Andros, Bahamas or even the Florida Keys, #1) are really not modern barrier reefs for two reasons. They present a succession of small margin reefs (Florida Keys #1) or patch reefs whose geological history is different than true barrier reef. Plus, their modern morphology and benthic zonations is very different than true barrier reefs and they don't make a physical barrier at all.

Typical barrier reefs include long uninterrupted reefs such as those encountered along New Caledonia coasts (#26, #27, #28, #29) or Belize (#5). The Great Barrier Reef, including Torres Strait reefs, is actually made of a dense matrix of reefs (#32, #33) whose formation does not follow the typical barrier reef scheme, though in some cases they clearly create a physical barrier (#31 Pompei Reefs, #34 Ribbon Reefs). Individually, none of the Great Barrier Reef reefs can compare in length to the New Caledonia barrier reefs and they are far smaller than many atoll rims. The longest uninterrupted barrier reef worldwide would be along the giant Pacific atoll rims.

Geomorphologically, the Great Barrier Reef provides a unique complexity of reef structures. The unique latitudinal gradient of the Great Barrier Reef offers a variety of seascapes and processes that have resulted in a tremendous number of lagoon and reef flats configurations. Numerous local or regional scales processes modulate the basic barrier reef scheme worldwide. For instance, islands may occur within the barrier reef system such as in Palau (#39) or Mayotte. Barrier reefs may form almost closed annular-shaped structures (Palau #40). Barrier reef may connect to fringing reefs making a continuous shore-ocean structure like in Wallis (#38). A barrier reef may occur within a larger barrier reef system (Lizard Island reefs within the Great Barrier Reef system) like annular faros occur in atolls. Some barrier reef sections can be drowned. Finally, barrier reefs may be double (#28) or even triple.

## Patch Reefs

Large lagoon/barrier reef complexes or shelf complexes often includes large patch reef complexes like in San Blas (#3), New-Caledonia (#35), Belize (#5 rhomboid patches), Palau (#39), Great Barrier Reef or South Cuba. Pacific atoll lagoons also include patch reefs and smaller sized pinnacles. Maldives atoll lagoons also include numerous patch reefs that can be differentiated from the lagoon faros depending on the presence/absence of a central depression and their depth (#36).

## Other Reef Types

The fringing, barrier, atoll, bank and patch structures are the basic reef structures described in reef geomorphology. Many reef systems do not fit into this classification and sub-types, hybrids or new types have been described or still need to be described. For example, the San Blas (#3) (Panama) Archipelago is dotted by four types of coral reef structures. Only two (fringing and patch reefs) fit the general terminology. Others are intermediate reef complexes and outer reef complexes exposed to the higher energy oceanic environment. The structure and seascape of the San Blas Archipelago is unique in the Caribbean, but the parallel could be done with the Great Barrier Reef: it is a matrix of reefs along the shelf, exposed to different hydroclimate influences. Many reef tracks, archipelagos or reef matrices need to be re-described because existing descriptions come from few historical sites that do not represent the entire system.
